Noise Band Displays and Output Displays The displays are very similar for the [Noise Monitor](NoiseBandsFFT.html) and the [Noise Band Monitor](NoiseBandsFilters.html) The user can select which bands to show on the scrolling display of sound pressure vs. time.  In real time operation, the levels in individual bands are shown in the upper display.  You can select to show either SPL across each band or spectrum level estimates.  Right click on the lower display for display options.   
  
  
Output Measurements are written to both the [Database](../../../utilities/generalDatabaseHelp/docs/database_database.html) and the [Binary Store](../../../utilities/BinaryStore/docs/binarystore_overview.html) if those modules are present in the PAMGuard configuration.   
[Previous: Noise Band Measurements ](NoiseBands.html)

---

Noise Band Measurement Overview   
PAMGuard contains two modules which can measure noise levels in multiple frequency bands. These are called the [Noise Monitor](NoiseBandsFFT.html) and the [Noise Band Monitor](NoiseBandsFilters.html), both available from the _File / Add Modules / Sound Processing_ menu.  Both modules should give the same results to within a fraction of a Decibel, so which you use is largely up to you. however, there are some subtle differences. The Noise Monitor module works using FFT data as input. The resolution of the noise measurements in both time and frequency is therefore governed by how you've set up the FFF. For example, if you've data with a sample rate of 48kHz and are using a FFT length of 1024 samples, then the frequency resolution of the FFT will be 48000/1024 = 46.9Hz. Since the measurements are made by adding up multiple bins of data from the FFT's, you can't get a sensible measurement below a frequency bin size of about 200Hz. Further, the FFT time intervals may not align nicely with exact seconds, so the intervals between measurements may be a bit longer than you've asked for. The Noise Band Monitor works differently, using a bank of filters to process the incoming raw data and these filters can go as low in frequency as you like, and take measurements from the data at the exat times you've asked for. On the other hand, the filter banks are slow to process, so this module will take more resources on your computer than the FFT based method. The advantages and disadvantages of the two methods are laid out below Method | Advantages | Disadvantages  
---|---|---  
[Noise Monitor](NoiseBandsFFT.html) (FFT method) | Faster (especially if you're doing the FFT anyway); User can create non-standard bands | Poor resolution at low frequency; Time intervals between measurement may not be precise  
[Noise Band Monitor](NoiseBandsFilters.html) (Filter bank method) | Better resolution at low frequency; Accurate time intervals; | Slower  
  
[Next: FFT Method ](NoiseBandsFFT.html)

---

Noise Band Measurement Overview   
This module allows you to measure noise in frequency bands of Third Octave, Deci-Decade, Octave, Decade, or bands you type in yourself. These measurements are compatible with the ANSI Standard [ ANSI S1.11-2004 American National Standard Specification for Octave-Band and Fractional-Octave-Band Analog and Digital Filters](https://webstore.ansi.org/standards/asa/ansiasas1112004r2009).  The module requires [FFT data](../../fftManagerHelp/docs/FFTEngine_Overview.html) as input. It works out which FFT data belong to which of the defined frequency bands, and as data arrive, sums the FFT data for each band. This means that at low frequencies, where the frequency bands your measuring are probably smaller, you start to lose resolution in frequency. If you want to measure noise at very low frequencies, you'll either have to use a very long FFT length, or switch to using the [Noise Band Monitor](NoiseBandsFilters.html).  Creating the module From the _**File>Add modules>Sound Processing**_ menu, or from the pop-up menu on the data model display select "_**Noise Monitor**_ ". Enter a name for the new module and press Ok.  Configuring the module To configure the module, open the settings dialog from the _**Detection>"your module name"**_ menu:    
  
For standard bands: Third Octave, Deci Decade, Octave, and Decade, just click the appropriate check box to the right of the dialog. These buttons will automatically generate as many bands as possible depending on the frequency resolution of the FFT data and the [Nyquist frequency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nyquist_frequency). The minimum frequency is calculated such that the lowest frequency band spans a minimum of two frequency bins in the FFF data. Bands will be centred at multiples of 1000Hz.  If you require other bands, for example, decade bands with edges at 100, 1000, 10000Hz, etc., you can enter these manually by pressing the _Add Other Bands_ button. Remember that it's not going to give accurate results if you enter band frequencies that are a fraction of the FFT data's frequency resolution. If you require measurements at lower frequencies you'll have to use a long FFT length, or [decimate](../../decimatorHelp/docs/decimator_decimator.html) the audio data to a lower frequency. Output Interval Enter the interval between measurements in seconds. Note that you may not get measurements at exactly these intervals because the start times of the FFT data may not like exactly on second boundaries. Number of measures in interval Generally, it's best to select the 'Use all FFT data' button, so that all data in all FFT's in the selected time interval will be included in noise measurement. However, if you're intervals are very long and you want to reduce processing load by only using a random sample of the data, you can set a lower number of measurement to take from that interval. Input FFT Length If you want your output times aligned nicely on second boundaries, you can use a FFT Hop, in the FFT module that is an exact factor of the sample rate. With the modern FFT algorithm used by PAMGuard, it's also generally OK to pick an FFT length that is not a power of 2. e.g. if you have data sampled at 384kHz, and want noise measurements right down to 10Hz, you could set up an FFT with a length of 384000 samples, and a hop of 192000. This would use more processing power than an FFT length of 262144 samples (the nearest exact power of 2), but will probably be OK.    
[Previous: Overview ](NoiseBands.html) [Next: Filter Bank Method ](NoiseBandsFilters.html)

---

Noise Band Measurement Overview   
This module allows you to measure noise in frequency bands of different widths: Octave, Third Octave, Deci-Decade, Decade, 1/10 Octave, and 1/12 Octave. These measurements are compatible with the ANSI Standard [ ANSI S1.11-2004 American National Standard Specification for Octave-Band and Fractional-Octave-Band Analog and Digital Filters](https://webstore.ansi.org/standards/asa/ansiasas1112004r2009).  The method works by first measuring noise noise bands the highest octave of the available data using a bank of band pass filters. The data are then decimated by a factor 2 (or 10 for Decade bands) and a further set of measurements made in the next octave down (i.e. the highest octave of the decimated data). This process can be repeated for as many decimators / octaves of data that you wish, reaching lower and lower frequencies. Because the amount of raw data to be processed is halved in each decimator, each bank of filters requires increasingly less processing power.  Creating the module From the _**File>Add modules>Sound Processing**_ menu, or from the pop-up menu on the data model display select "_**Noise Band Monitor**_ ". Enter a name for the new module and press Ok.  Configuring the module To configure the module, open the settings dialog from the _**Detection>"your module name"**_ menu:    
  
Raw Data Source Select a source of raw data. This will generally be a [ Sound Acquisition Module](../../AcquisitionHelp/docs/AcquisitionOverview.html) or the output of a [ Decimator](../../decimatorHelp/docs/decimator_decimator.html) if a lower frequency noise measurement is required. Check the channels you want to measure noise on.  Output Interval Enter the interval between measurements in seconds. Measurement Bands Select the band type you wish to measure in from the drop down list, and the Reference Frequency, which is the centre frequency of a band, against which all other band centres will be calculated. By default, this is 1000Hz.  Select the maximum and minimum frequencies you want to measure between. Bands will then be calculated to fit between these limits, i.e. the upper edge of the highest band will not be greater than the maximum frequency and the lower edge of the lowest band will not be lower than the minimum frequency. e.g. if you are working with third octave bands and set the frequency limits to be 200Hz and 24kHz, you'll get 20 bands between 222.7Hz and 22.63kHz.  Filters Select Butterworth or IIR Filters. Generally, Butterworth filters will operate much faster than FIR filters on a desktop computer. Generally 6th order Butterworth or 7th order (128 tap) FIR filters are more than adequate. The exact cut off frequencies and filter responses are shown for information only.    
Bode Plots The filter responses and the responses of the decimators are shown in the Bode plot on the right hand side of the dialog. It is also possible to overlay the various ANSI standards. The scale of the amplitude axis can be altered by double clicking on it.    
[Previous: FFT Method ](NoiseBandsFFT.html) [Next: Displays and Output ](NoiseBandDisplays.html)
